From The New York Times, I'm Rachel
Abrams and this is The Daily.
Breaking news, Israel saying it is
[music] now expanding operations in
Lebanon. With the world's attention on
the US-Israeli war with Iran over the
last two weeks, a second front has
[music] opened in Lebanon. The target of
those strikes, a Hezbollah stronghold.
The IDF [music] says it's hitting sites
linked to the group, which is backed and
funded by Iran. [music]
Israel has pummeled southern Lebanon and
southern Beirut with air strikes,
displacing almost a million people,
[music] and it's expanded its assault
into other parts of the capital.
I carried the children quickly and we
left towards the airport road. People
were like ants, like judgment day, it
was like judgment [music] day.
One man, his wife and four young
children have fled a few miles north to
safer ground. Like many families,
they'll spend the night on the streets
watching the strikes at a distance.
[music]
Today, Beirut bureau chief Christina
Goldbaum explains [music] how the crisis
in Lebanon connects to the broader war,
what Israel hopes to achieve,
and what the Lebanese [music] people
fear may come next.
It's Monday, March 16th.
Christina, since the war with Iran
began, I think it's been clear that
there has been sort of this second front
emerging in Lebanon.
It started when Hezbollah, the
Iranian-backed militia group that's
based in Lebanon, lobbed missiles at
Israel. Israel lobbed missiles back. The
two sides have traded fire for days now.
And that is not in and of itself an
unfamiliar scenario, right? But
things have really escalated, and you
are based in Beirut. You are the Beirut
bureau chief for The New York Times. And
so I'd like for you to paint a picture
for our audience of what the last few
days have looked like on the ground.
So, what we've seen over the last 2
weeks is what feels like the beginnings
of another major war in the country.
Nowadays, when you're walking through
Beirut, there is this acrid smell in the
air from all of the air strikes in and
around the city. And you have the sound
of Israeli drones overhead, this loud
buzzing that's been a near constant over
the last 2 weeks. In certain parts of
the city, life feels very normal, kind
of untouched by the war, buildings
intact. But in other parts of the city,
walking around, you can see this mass
displacement that has happened. Do you
see people putting up kind of makeshift
tents out of tarps and out of gray
blankets that people have set up in
parking lots, on the seaside corniche,
on sidewalks, and in parks, and living
there because there isn't room in the
schools that the government has turned
into shelters.
>> Mhm. In the Dahiyeh, in the southern
suburbs where Hezbollah holds a lot of
sway, a lot of buildings there have been
just completely cratered in this
bombardment by Israel. And in the last
couple of days, it felt like it
escalated even more when Israel started
targeting buildings and cars within
central Beirut itself, and also issuing
evacuation orders for buildings in
central Beirut.
You have guys who are, you know,
shooting weapons up in the air to warn
people to get out, and massive crowds of
people trying to get out of those
buildings, get out of the street, get
out of the way before these strikes hit.
So, there's very much now a sense, even
in Beirut, that this conflict is
escalating, that fewer and fewer places
in the city that once felt safe are
still safe. And also, just the scale of
this is already huge. I mean, over a
million people have been displaced so
far. That's in a country of 5.8 million
people total. And you have more than 800
people who've been killed in Israeli
strikes so far. So, now there is just
this kind of tenseness here where people
are really coming to terms with the fact
that the country is yet again, in less
than 2 years, being dragged into another
major war.
Christina, can you give us a sense of
why this feels different than previous
campaigns that Israel has waged in
Lebanon, even as recently as 2024?
I think what makes this different is the
fears now that there is going to be a
major Israeli ground invasion, which is
something that the country has not seen
since the 1980s. There has been this
massive build-up of troops on the
Israeli side of the border. And the
rhetoric that we're hearing from Israeli
officials is increasingly suggesting
that they also view this war as
something different. The Israeli Defense
Minister compared the southern suburbs
of Beirut to Khan Yunis, saying that
that's what it will soon look like.
That's the city in Gaza that was
completely destroyed. And he also said
recently that if the Lebanese government
cannot prevent Hezbollah from firing on
Israel, then Israel will take it upon
itself to do so in Lebanese territory.
And so, that's obviously an escalation
of rhetoric that has people here very on
edge and feeling like this is going to
be something bigger than what we saw the
last time around. I believe the Defense
Minister, I think I saw comments from
him saying that he wanted to basically
flatten large swaths of southern Beirut.
He was naming individual cities. Uh yes,
he said that about Dahiyeh, this cluster
of neighborhoods in the southern edge of
the city. The other thing we've seen
that makes this feel like it's going to
be much bigger is that for the first
time, we didn't see this in 2024, but
for the first time Israel has issued
sweeping evacuation orders for all of
the southern suburbs of Beirut, as well
as a huge swath of territory in southern
Lebanon that extends as far as 25 miles
from the border. That's something that
we did not see in the war in 2024.
Obviously, there's a war going on with
Iran right now. What is the relationship
between this war in Lebanon and that
wider conflict? So, after the war in
Iran began, Hezbollah then fired on
Israel in retaliation, it said, for the
killing of Ayatollah Ali Khamenei there.
Israel then struck back and started
firing on Lebanon in the south, in the
east, and in the southern parts of
>> Beirut. And what everyone understood was
that Israel was kind of taking this
attack by Hezbollah as an opportunity to
do what they have wanted to do for so
long, which is for once and for all take
out Hezbollah. Mhm. And so, what we're
seeing right now is essentially kind of
a war within a war, the second front
that is actually a much bigger war for
Lebanon and feels much more
consequential for this country.
So, just to be clear, Hezbollah started
this conflict in solidarity with Iran
and it has spiraled from there. That's
right. And it's important to note that
this kind of took a lot of people here
by surprise. Very few people thought
that Hezbollah would get involved in
this conflict. Obviously, Israel has
been at odds and in conflict with
Lebanon and Hezbollah for many, many
years. Can you just give us a brief
history of that back and forth?
Sure. So, this dates back to the 1980s.
>> [music]
>> And to set the scene a little bit, you
know, at that time, Lebanon is in the
midst of the civil war. You have
Palestinian groups in southern Lebanon
that are launching attacks on Israel.
And then, in 1982, Israel launches this
large-scale invasion of southern
Lebanon, getting as far as the capital
Beirut, and then occupying the south
for, I mean, nearly 20 years. And it was
within that context of the 1980s [music]
that Hezbollah came to be. It emerged as
this Shiite militant and political
movement that was dedicated to what it
described as resisting Israeli presence
in Lebanon.
And it had the backing of the vanguard
of Shia Islam in the region, Iran. And
so throughout that period of Israeli
occupation in the south, Hezbollah
militants were fighting [music] with
Israeli forces, and eventually when
Israel withdrew from southern Lebanon in
2000, it was seen as this major victory
for Hezbollah.
>> [music]
>> And with that it started to expand its
political influence while also keeping
its armed wing. So for years after that,
you know, tension was still very high
along the border between the two. There
were periodic clashes.
But then in 2023,
we saw this much larger [music]
escalation between the two.
So in October 2023, Hezbollah launched
rockets at Israeli positions in
solidarity with Hamas, another
Iran-backed group. Which had just
attacked Israel in the October 7th
attacks, of course. That's right. And
that escalated into a major conflict. I
mean, Israel bombarded much of the south
and eastern Lebanon as well as Beirut.
It exploded thousands of pagers carried
by Hezbollah members.
And it killed Hassan Nasrallah, the
long-time leader of Hezbollah, in what
was a major blow to the group. I think
for the last year a lot of people have
had the impression that because of all
of those events, the killing of
Nasrallah, the pager incident, the
attacks by Israel, that Hezbollah had
been severely weakened, right? So if
Hezbollah has been severely weakened,
why would Israel need to go after them
so hard right now if presumably they
pose less of a threat?
I think what we're seeing right now is
Israel really seizing on this moment
where a lot of eyes are on the war in
Iran. The country's feeling emboldened
by its partnership with the United
States, feeling its own military
strength, and it senses this kind of
weakness and it's two, you know,
fiercest adversaries cuz Hezbollah was
always the strongest among Iran's
proxies. We also know from, you know,
reporting out of our Jerusalem bureau
that this Israeli offensive in Lebanon
has been months in the making. And
Israel was essentially just waiting for
the opportunity for Hezbollah to fire on
Israel, to attack in order to carry out
these long-wave plans.
And I think it's important to note that
while the kind of going narrative over
the last year was that Hezbollah has
been battered, what we're seeing now is
proof that they're still able to mount a
fight even if they are severely
weakened. We're seeing that they've been
able to manufacture and locally assemble
arms within Lebanon to replenish its
weapon stockpile. And even after, you
know, their senior military ranks were
wiped out during the war, what we've
also seen now is how members of Iran's
Islamic Revolutionary Guard Corps, the
IRGC, appeared to come into the country
to replenish those ranks and take even
greater control of Hezbollah's military
arms.
And we've seen proof of that over the
past 2 weeks. Already at least two
Israeli soldiers have been killed and
more than a dozen injured. So there is
this sense now that even though over the
last year Hezbollah has not appeared to
be very militarily strong, while it
hasn't responded to the near daily air
strikes by Israel that have happened
despite the ceasefire, that in fact it
was using the past year to in part
rebuild and prepare for this major
conflict that it too expected would
happen with Israel.
Given all of that, if Israel's goal is
to finally take out Hezbollah's ability
to operate and just maybe completely
wipe them out once and for all,
is that actually possible in this
moment?
So this has been a long-time project of
Israel for decades now. And so far,
Israel has not been able to disarm or
eliminate the group.
>> [music]
>> But, I think what we're seeing is
Israeli officials seeing a moment
[music] to seize on when they could
finally take out this group that has
[music] for decades posed a threat to
Israel.
But, all of the challenges that have
existed over the last several decades
when it comes to Israel's aim [music] of
disarming Hezbollah are still there. So,
this is still a very complicated
endeavor.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back. [music]
So, Christina, you explained that Israel
would face all of these challenges in
its quest to take out Hezbollah. But,
this time the circumstances are
different enough that at least Israeli
officials seem to think that they might
have more of a chance. Can you just
explain why they think that? So, I think
first off, you have to keep in mind that
yes, Hezbollah is an Iran-backed
militant group, but it's also a very
strong political and social movement
that is embedded in Lebanese society
here, especially among the Shia
community, which is about a third of the
country. And for decades, it has
essentially had the Lebanese government
in a chokehold where no political
decisions could be made without its
support. So, it is the most powerful
political party in the country. It holds
seats in Lebanon's parliament, and it
also runs this vast network of social
services that its supporters benefit
from, like schools and hospitals. And it
employs tens of thousands of people
within that network. So, it does hold
this immense sway in Lebanese society. A
lot of people have described it as being
like a state within a state.
I visited Beirut a few years ago and one
thing that really stood out to me was
all of the Hezbollah flags, Hezbollah
shirts, Hezbollah merchandise that you
could purchase, particularly in the
south of Lebanon where Hezbollah
obviously has a huge presence. And it
really hit home this idea that
Hezbollah in a way that perhaps
Americans or people outside of the
country can't fully appreciate, it is
this political party. It is fully
embedded in the population. I had a
friend say to me that if his mother's
car broke down, he hoped it would be in
a Hezbollah neighborhood because those
are the folks that are more likely to
help. That's right. But, now we're also
beginning to see that loyal base of
support tested like it hasn't been
before and more tired than it's been
before.
A lot of people who have been [music]
displaced, the vast majority, are people
who are in areas that are more
sympathetic to Hezbollah. So, it means
that a lot of Hezbollah supporters are
the ones that have been shouldering the
burdens of these wars over the last 2
years.
>> [music]
>> The one thing that they keep telling me
is how exhausted they are. How after the
last war in 2023, 2024, and then this
one, they're tired of evacuating from
their homes, they're tired of living in
shelters, they're tired of their towns
and villages, especially in the south,
being flattened by air strikes. They're
tired of rebuilding homes only to now
worry that they're going to get
demolished [music] again.
So, I think we're starting to see this
very new feeling right now. For ages,
[music]
there's been this kind of fervent
ideological zeal within Hezbollah's
support base to resist Israel at any
cost. And Hezbollah still does command a
lot of support and can turn out massive
crowds, especially in Beirut. But, right
now we're starting to see that
commitment give way to this kind of
weariness of war and also just some
people that are questioning why
Hezbollah chose to become involved in
this war. Why they chose [music] to fire
on Israel only after the killing of a
foreign leader, Ayatollah Khamenei, and
not over the last year when Lebanese
have been killed in Israeli airstrikes.
It sounds like what people are telling
you is that increasingly
they are maybe for the first time
questioning Hezbollah, questioning their
support for Hezbollah and that feels
quite new. Yes, that's right.
In one of the shelters that we went to
Can you tell us her name and age? I
actually ran into a nurse who I had met
during the last war in 2024 in a
hospital in the southern city of
Nabatieh.
From Nabatieh? And when did you leave
Nabatieh? And at that time she was
dealing with this influx of people who
were injured in Israeli strikes and now
with this war she's been displaced from
Nabatieh to Beirut. And my colleagues
and I sat with her and her family and we
were talking about this very question.
What are the costs of these wars? Are
these wars worth it?
And they were debating among themselves
whether Hezbollah remains their main
defender because keep in mind, you know,
as Israeli forces have moved into the
south, the Lebanese army is pretty much
nowhere to be found.
On the other hand, they're also
wondering if actually because Hezbollah
has now dragged the country into war
twice in two years, whether that is
still the case, whether they are still
able to defend the Shia community and
whether the cost the Shia community is
bearing is worth it.
If the Lebanese government is so
dysfunctional,
what is their capacity to help their own
people and what is their relationship to
Hezbollah? What do they want from
Hezbollah in this moment?
So, this has been the main topic of
political conversation in Lebanon over
the last year. Because in that time, the
country has kind of reached this
political tipping point. After the
ceasefire in 2024,
there was this kind of sea change here,
where the Lebanese government agreed for
the first time ever to begin a process
of disarming Hezbollah. Now, of course,
over the past year, we've seen the many,
many challenges that come with trying to
do so. The Lebanese military is weak.
You know, its soldiers are underpaid. It
is not terribly well equipped. So, in
many ways, it is outmatched by
Hezbollah.
And at the same time, there is this fear
that if the government moves too quickly
and too decisively, it could lead to a
clash between Lebanese soldiers and
Hezbollah fighters. And that here is a
recipe for civil war.
I wonder what the point of all of this
is then, with Israel saying that it's
going to take out Hezbollah. Like, is
that kind of the equivalent This is a
super imperfect comparison, but the
equivalent of the US saying it's going
to take out the Taliban, just in terms
of one country saying it's going to take
out this heavily armed, embedded group
in another country that doesn't, for
many reasons, seem realistic. Like, I
just sort of wonder if this is Israel
kind of doing what it's always done with
Hezbollah, which is basically
periodically crippling them, but not
actually totally destroying them.
I mean, that's the rhetoric we've heard,
right? Is this idea that Israel wants to
completely eliminate the threat from
Hezbollah. But, I think what a lot of
people here see is this major build-up
of Israeli military forces along the
border, on the Israeli side of the
border. And that has made people here in
Lebanon extremely concerned about the
possibility of a massive Israeli ground
invasion of Southern Lebanon, and
[clears throat] possible occupation of a
large swath of Southern Lebanon,
essentially creating a new, much larger
buffer zone with Israel. Now, that of
course has brought up a lot of concerns
within Lebanon of mass displacement,
because we've already seen more than a
million people displaced from their
homes from this conflict.
>> Mhm. And also this possibility that
Israel would reoccupy Southern Lebanon
just feels like this repeat of history
here. And it's coming at a time when
these memories of the civil war, of the
last occupation are still seared into
people's minds here.
And I can imagine for Israel though, the
creation of that buffer zone in Southern
Lebanon, buffer zone maybe aka occupied
territory, would be a win politically
for Netanyahu, right? Like even if he
doesn't oust Hezbollah completely, he
may still end up with a swath of land in
Southern Lebanon that achieves at least
some of his political goals. Yeah, you
could imagine that is part of this
calculation.
How should we think about the United
States role here? Obviously they're
heavily involved in the conflict with
Iran, but what is their stance on
Israel's action in Lebanon? So typically
the US has tried to temper Israel's
efforts to take out Hezbollah because of
these fears of it's spiraling into a
larger war and destabilizing the region.
It's the same reason why we haven't seen
Israel involved in a war with Iran like
this before. But we're seeing that
that's beginning to change now. The US
has essentially allowed Israel to carry
out this bombardment of Lebanon. And
it's also been putting an immense amount
of pressure on the Lebanese government
to act more decisively to disarm
Hezbollah, to declare the group a
terrorist group, and take a much tougher
stance against Hezbollah despite the
concerns from Lebanese officials that
doing so could be very destabilizing for
the country. So basically, whereas the
United States has been a check on
Israel's actions in Lebanon in the past,
at least to some degree, that check
seems to have disappeared or dissipated.
Yeah, at least so far, that's what we've
seen. I think we're still waiting to see
as this war escalates whether the US
decides to step in and try to rein
Israel back in. So Christina, just
stepping back, should we think about
this war in Lebanon as part of the
larger war with Iran? How are you
thinking about how they're connected?
So sure, I mean, on the one hand, the
two are clearly connected, right?
Hezbollah is an Iran-backed militant
group. It fired on Israel in response to
the killing of an Iranian leader. And in
a lot of ways, what we're seeing now is
the kind of epitome of Iran's axis of
resistance, right? Hezbollah firing on
Israel, coordinating their rocket
attacks on Israel with Iran, trying to
create a second front in this war. And
more and more, some of these missiles
and rockets are beginning to get through
and hit Israeli territory. Mhm.
Christina, what do you see as the
possible outcomes in this conflict in
Lebanon, both in the short term and also
in the long term?
So Hezbollah is trying to inflict as
much pain and as many casualties as they
can on Israeli forces in order to change
the political cost for Israel to
continue to engage in this war. We've
already seen that Hezbollah has killed
two Israeli soldiers and injured more
than a dozen others.
But at the same time, there is this
growing sense here that this war will
last much longer than the Iranian war.
People are afraid that when the war in
Iran ends, Israel is going to turn its
attention to Lebanon and focus its
military capabilities here.
And also, even just in the last couple
of days, there are these new fears as
people see similarities in the messaging
from Israeli officials in Gaza and in
Lebanon. The Israeli military has issued
these sweeping evacuation orders for
much of southern Lebanon, which is
similar to what we saw in Gaza the other
day. Israeli warplanes were dropping
leaflets over central Beirut calling on
people to disarm Hezbollah and talking
about a quote new reality in Lebanon.
And Israeli officials have said they
believe Hezbollah is using ambulances
and civilian trucks to move weaponry and
started to hint that those two would no
longer be off limits.
So these eerie similarities are starting
to create a new fear in Lebanon that
Israel's aims in this war are much more
permanent than in previous [music] ones.
It sounds like the Lebanese not without
some reasons are concerned about another
protracted deadly conflict. Yes, so this
is creating the prospect of more clashes
with Hezbollah, more displaced people,
and more civilian casualties for years
and years to come.
>> [music]
>> Christina Goldbaum, thank you so much.
Thanks for having me.
>> [music]
>> We'll be right back.
Here's what else you need to know today.
Iran's foreign minister Abbas Araqchi
>> [music]
>> said that the country was not ready to
hold talks with the United States. We
never asked for a ceasefire.
And [music] we have never asked even for
negotiation. Araqchi's comments directly
contradict an interview President Trump
gave just one day earlier during which
he said that Iran quote wants to make a
deal. [music]
And
the US Embassy in Baghdad has urged
Americans to leave Iraq [music]
immediately after it was attacked for
the second time since the war with Iran
started. The warning said militias
aligned with Iran had carried [music]
out numerous attacks on targets
associated with the United States
including diplomatic facilities, [music]
American companies, and hotels
frequented by foreigners.
>> [music]
>> The alert comes after Americans all over
the region have complained that the
Trump administration was not providing
enough assistance [music]
to citizens stranded in evacuation
zones.
>> [music]
>> Today's episode [music] was produced by
Jessica Chung, Mary Wilson, Rochelle
Banja, and Olivia Natt. It was edited by
M.J. Davis Lynn [music] with help from
Paige Cowett, and contains music by Dan
Powell, Alicia B. Eubanks, and Rowan D.
Misto. Our theme music is by Wonderly.
[music]
This episode was engineered by Alyssa
Moxley.
>> [music]
[music]
>> That's it for The Daily. I'm Rachel
Abrams. See you tomorrow.